Why you might wanna be a PM.
So I'm gonna tell you what I like about
being a PM and what I don't like about
being a PM, and we'll start with
what's hard about being a PM.
If you do not like meetings and e-mail
like me, then you probably are gonna
have trouble with part of your job because
a lot of your job is meetings and emails.
A good half of this course is going
to be about how do we do meetings and
email well?
I'm not sorry that's a huge
part of what this job is.
You might follow up with
a question as like,
why the hell are you a PM if you don't
like those two things is like one,
I don't think anyone likes those things
and if you do, What is wrong with you?
[LAUGH] That's probably
strong language to say, but
I don't think anyone enjoys like
sitting in long meetings or
having to write per my last
email in an email, right?
But generally like this is what it is,
coordination and communication.
And then this was actually
probably my biggest struggle with
moving from being
an engineer to being a PM.
When I was a engineer, there's
a little sense of accomplishment that
every time you say git add, git commit and
git push, that I did something.
I took a piece of work and
I did it, and then I pushed it, and
then now I get to feel accomplishment
because the mechanically,
I stamped my work as done and
sent it off, right?
And then I closed the ticket and
that happens frequently, right?
As a PM or sorry, as an engineer,
I was committing work at least once a day,
if not multiple times a day
that was a constant button,
I got to press, you did it.
You did it, you're working and
it feels good, and
that feeling of productivity is like if I
went a whole day without making a commit,
I would feel unproductive, right?
And that happened a lot, when I had
a heavy meeting day as an engineer,
I would get to the end of it
like I did nothing today.
What's hard about being a PM is
you have to find different ways of
feeling productive.
At least for me as an engineer, you don't
get a sense of accomplishment when you
send an email, you don't get a sense of
accomplishment when you hold a meeting.
All of those things, it's much squishier
in terms of when did I do something?
When did I accomplish something?
When do I get to claim work is mine?
These are all questions that
I really struggled with.
And for my first little bit as
a PM at Microsoft, I was like,
I don't understand how to
feel good about my job.
And so I had a PM mentor that helped me,
my manager at Microsoft
helped me quite a bit.
And honestly still sometimes
feels like I got a whole day of
like back to back meetings like
what did I even get done today.
But when you start learning to recognize
when steps are being taken forward and
in your work and
like okay we cleared this review,
we got this doc approved, we finished
planning, we had a good sprint.
We close to these issues,
I started to recognize those things and
okay, Brian, you can feel
a little good about that right.
And actually that dovetails nicely
into the second part of this.
Whenever I shipped work,
I remember seeing,
I shipped a new sign up experience for
Netflix TV.
Where you could like sign up for
Netflix using your tv, and I gotta look at
that and I remember going and showing
my mom, I was like, mom, I built that.
And I got to feel, it was really easy for
me to take that sense of
accomplishment of like, look what I built,
I wrote the code that does that.
Now, in retrospect, there was a PM that
defined that work, there was a project
manager that managed all of that, there
was a designer that designed that whole
experience, there was a QA engineer that
went through and tested all of that.
Did I mention that to my mom?
No, of course not, I built it, right?
I don't know, but I never felt important
to me because I felt like I did enough of
that I can claim that as my work.
Now when I see things launched as a PM,
I'm much earlier in those cycles and
I do help them kind of see
him over the finish line,
but most of the glut of my work came
at the beginning of those projects.
And so all the final work and do it like
a huge spike on this, to get everything
defined to work and then it doesn't
get done for like another six months.
And so when I look at that,
it barely feels mine anymore, right, and
I know everything that went into it.
I know how much work the designer went and
put into it, I know how much the QA.
And so I had a hard time looking at and
saying,
I did that because I know it wasn't me,
totally.
So it took some time to rewire my
blank is to say, it's okay, Brian,
to claim still that you did that and
that we did that, and
it's okay to take some credit for
that yourself.
But I also remember as a engineer
being really annoyed at PMs and
saying look boss, look what I did,
and it's man, I did that.
You didn't write any code for
that so, I don't know.
Taking credit for work was also hard for
me, but I also witnessed one of my
coworkers at Microsoft, Sarah Drasner,
another teacher for front-end masters.
She did a really good job of saying,
I did that and so did these people,
they also did this.
And so sharing that credit publicly also
made me feel okay taking some credit for
that work as well.
So, I don't know,
you might not have an issue with that, but
it was a struggle for
me after being an engineer for so long.
This is one that I don't necessarily
struggle with as much, but
I've definitely seen PM struggle with it,
so I'm gonna talk about it a little bit.
What to do next as a PM can be very
unclear, you'll finish something and
as an engineer you just go to the backlog
you pull some another ticket off and
you start working on it right.
If you don't know what to do next as
an engineer your project manager probably
effed up somewhere, right?
As a PM, no one is really
telling you what to do next and
what you do next is really up to you.
And it's an exercise in prioritization of,
how am I gonna spend my time?
And what's hard is like you always
have too many things to do and
also sometimes it feels like
you don't have enough to do.
And that can simultaneously
live in your chest and
give you an anxiety attack, right?
So it's a balance of what
needs to be done now today,
what do I have to ship today?
What am I gonna have to have done
within the next week or two?
And when do I have time to do
strategy work for a longer term and
you have to do all of those.
And if you don't actually hold yourself
to as I have to do strategy work for
later you will never do it because
there's always enough to do now.
So that can be very difficult for new PMs,
learning how to spend your time correctly,
and learning what to do when
you finish something else..
And I would say of all of these.
If this is hard for you and
that's a very difficult thing to you
might wanna consider not becoming
a PM because it never gets better.
It's always kind of a struggle,
like, what am I going to do next.
Its always exercises,
I have something on fire and
I have something on fire,
what fire is more important?
And sometimes the answer is
like they're both important and
they both have to be done and you still
gotta pick one, right, that can be hard.
Okay, questions?
Anything about that about
what's hard about being a PM?
Those are the four that I kind of fell to
talk about, but I'm sure there's more.
>> How do you balance advocating for
what's best for the product,
the team, and the company?
And if they're in conflict, what's the
communication like to the individuals that
aren't gonna win that battle?
>> That's a good question, it depends.
[LAUGH] So, I mean, this is probably
another exercise in prioritization, right?
So I would probably start asking myself,
cuz I could see myself with,
this seems really important for me, this
seems really important for my team, and
this seems really important
to the company as a whole.
And I'd probably start trying to break it
down, what kind of impact am I gonna have
versus how much effort am I
going to expend on this and
do I have the resources to actually
accomplish what I'm trying to get done.
If I would say typically when you
run into those kind of conflicts,
one of those clearly wins,
this is either gonna be huge impact or
this is gonna be way too expensive.
And like those big bets
are still appropriate but
you have to kind of know how to
marshal your social capital.
When I say social capital, it's credit
that you have with your friends,
right, you do favors for
other people to make withdrawals later.
I mean, it seems transactional and that's
because it's actually transactional but,
Yes, some of those asks can be really
expensive on your sister teams and
your organizations, and making sure
that you are doing the correct thing for
all of those things because
all of them are important.
So, yeah, generally try and
break it down and
see which one is the cost versus impact.
And then if they're equal at that point,
I probably err on the side
of a corporate team mind.
I would say that's a very weak bias,
that I try not to get to that point.